
                            AVAILABLE R RESOURCES

1 FAQ
*****

A collection of Frequently Asked Questions and their answers is maintained
by Kurt Hornik <Kurt.Hornik@r-project.org> and can be found at the URL

     `http://www.ci.tuwien.ac.at/~hornik/R/R-FAQ.html'

A text version is in file `FAQ' in this directory, and an HTML version is
available as file `doc/html/faq.html' and via the on-line help (on the
index page given by `help.start()').

2 Mailing lists
***************

Thanks to Martin Maechler <Martin.Maechler@r-project.org> there are a
number of mailing lists which are used by R users and developers.  They are

    <r-announce@lists.r-project.org>
          major announcements of new R releases or applications;

    <r-packages@lists.r-project.org>
          announcements on the availability of new or enhanced contributed
          packages;

    <r-help@lists.r-project.org>
          general inquiries and discussion about R;

    <r-devel@lists.r-project.org>
          discussions about the future of R and pre-testing of new versions.

The web interface at `http://www.stat.math.ethz.ch/mailman/listinfo/'
provides convenient access to information on these lists, subscription,
archives, and so on.  One can also subscribe (or unsubscribe) via email,
e.g. to `R-help' by sending `subscribe' (or `unsubscribe') in the _body_ of
the message (not in the subject!) to <r-help-request@lists.r-project.org>.

See `http://www.r-project.org/mail.html' for more information on the R
mailing lists.

3 Archives
**********

The Comprehensive R Archive Network (CRAN) is a collection of sites which
carry identical material, consisting of the R distribution(s), the
contributed extensions, documentation for R, and binaries.  It is currently
mirrored daily at

`http://cran.au.r-project.org/'
     PlanetMirror,  Australia

`http://mirror.aarnet.edu.au/pub/CRAN/'
     AARNet (accessible only from Australia and New Zealand)

`http://cran.at.r-project.org/'
     TU Wien, Austria

`http://cran.br.r-project.org/'
     Universidade Federal do Paraná, Brasil

`http://www.termix.ufv.br/CRAN/'
     Federal University of Vicosa, Brasil

`http://lmq.esalq.usp.br/CRAN/'
     University of Sao Paulo, Piracicaba, Brasil

`http://probability.ca/cran/'
     University of Toronto, Canada

`http://cran.dk.r-project.org/'
     SunSITE, Denmark

`http://cran.fr.r-project.org/'
     INRA, Toulouse, France

`http://cran.hu.r-project.org/'
     Semmelweis University, Hungary

`http://microarrays.unife.it/CRAN/'
     Universita di Ferrara, Italy

`ftp://ftp.u-aizu.ac.jp/pub/lang/R/CRAN/'
     University of Aizu, Japan

`http://www.fastmirrors.org/cran/'
     Fastmirrors.org, Slovenia

`http://cran.za.r-project.org/'
     Rhodes University, South Africa

`http://cran.es.r-project.org/'
     Spanish National Research Network, Madrid, Spain

`http://cran.ch.r-project.org/'
     ETH Zurich, Switzerland

`http://cran.csie.ntu.edu.tw/'
     National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan

`http://cran.uk.r-project.org/'
     University of Bristol, UK

`http://cran.us.r-project.org/'
     Pair Networks, Pittsburgh, PA, USA

`http://cran.stat.ucla.edu/'
     University of California, Los Angeles, CA, USA

`http://www.bioconductor.org/CRAN/'
     Dana Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA, USA

`http://cran.get-software.com'
     Get-Software.com, Augusta, ME, USA

`http://www.ibiblio.org/pub/languages/R/CRAN/'
     University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC, USA

`http://lib.stat.cmu.edu/R/CRAN/'
     Statlib at Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA

`http://www.binarycode.org/cran'
     BinaryCode.org, Austin, TX, USA

`http://mirrors.mix5.com/CRAN/'
     Mix5.com, Houston, TX, USA

Many of these sites can also be accessed using FTP.  In the interests of
preserving international bandwidth please use a site near you if possible.

The CRAN master site at TU Wien, Austria, can be found at the URLs

     `http://cran.r-project.org/'            
     `ftp://cran.r-project.org/pub/R/'       

and is also available for anonymous rsync at `cran.r-project.org::CRAN'.

4 Bug-tracking system
*********************

R has a bug-tracking system (or perhaps a bug-filing system is a more
precise description) available on the net at

     `http://bugs.r-project.org/'

and via e-mail to <r-bugs@r-project.org>.  The R function `bug.report()'
can be used to invoke an editor from a within an R session and send the
report to the right address.  It also fills in some basic information, such
as your R version and operating system, which has proved helpful in the
debugging process.

The source distribution has a file `BUGS' at the top level giving a summary
of the entries at the time this distribution was prepared.

