		Windows-specific changes to R
		=============================

See the file NEWS for changes that affect all versions of R.


R 2.1.0
=======

Support for seek() on > 2Gb files has been added.

You will be asked to select a CRAN mirror when downloading/updating
packages unless options("CRAN") has already been set in your session,
e.g. in your .Rprofile file or from the 'Select CRAN mirror' menu
item.  (In batch use, not having set a mirror will lead to an error.)
BDR's supplementary collection is now included in the default
options("CRAN"): if you want to include it set something like
options(CRAN=c(some_cran_mirror, http://www.stats.ox.ac.uk/pub/RWin"))

The new (in R 2.0.0) graphics pars "lend", "ljoin" and "lmitre" are
now implemented.

`Writing R Extensions' now documents how to interface a front-end
directly to R.dll, and there are some new convenience functions for
such front-ends.

R CMD / Rcmd now set HOME if unset, e.g. for use in Rcmd check.



R 2.0.1 patched
===============

We work around reported bugs in Windows XP as to which characters are
printable by attempting to print all non-control characters when using
print().



R 2.0.1
=======

There is a new menu item to set a CRAN mirror.

Bug fixes
---------

jpeg(), png() and bmp() were not handling background colours properly.

It seems that on some systems (but not the maintainers') Mozilla 1.7.3
requires \ not / in filepaths, so help(topic, htmlhelp=TRUE) now uses
\.  (PR#7269)  Hopefully no system requires / not \ !

Changes to help() meant that help(topic, chmhelp=TRUE) was no longer
working if `topic' was an alias.  (PR#7269)

Recent changes caused (D)COM to sometimes go into infinite loops.

Any change in the GUI preferences via the dialog box changed font
(even if to the same font as before).  This is causing problems in MDI
mode with toolbars (PR#7277), where real font changes are not working
properly.

Control keys in Tcl/Tk windows were not handled properly; Tcl/Tk
interacted badly with Rgui in other ways as well.

R CMD SHLIB gave spurious error messages for inputs like all.f and all.c.

`make recommended' was not consulting the setting of WINHELP or HELP,
so failed if HHW was not installed.

We have increased the chances that installing a source package from
an explicit path with spaces in will work, so e.g.

    R CMD INSTALL "/Documents and Settings/myname/Source Files/mypkg"

will probably work -- it is still not recommended.  You can also
get away with backslashes here, but forward slashes are safer.

select.list(preselect=) was not working. (PR#7328)

The graphics recording mechanism windows(record = TRUE) could cause memory 
corruption.


    -------------------------------------------------------------------

	For changes prior to the release of R 2.0.0 on 4 Oct 2004
	see the files CHANGES0 and CHANGES1 in the source distribution.
